Game: Virulence / Cellbox / Pathogen Evolution / Immunowars
Modes:
Cell box: Game mode where a player choses the side of the pathogens or the immune system and can try out its effectiveness on different (premade) levels of protection or attack.
Campaign: Keep developing different pathogens and defensive mechanisms to upgrade your available pathogens or immune system in an ever expanding campaign. After choosing a side, the AI will keep throwing better pathogens at you, or use more specific defenses and by research one can try to discover new ways of offense and defense.
Versus: Game mode where a player choses the side of the pathogens or the immune system and battles in a “create and release” fashion, versus the AI or in a later stage even another player. Players could try to release different kinds of pathogens trying to deplete the immune system of counter mechanisms and even create new ones on-the-go to adjust to the enemies offensive or defensive styles.

The Cellbox:
This is the core of the game. In here a player tries to discover and unlock different pathogens and defensive mechanisms. One could start out with a basic germ core, develop a specific outer membrane out of Endotoxins, a capsule and fimbriae, which together would unlock the Neisseria germ achievement. This bacterium will have certain offensive and defensive capabilities, but also weak points. It can destruct blood cells because of its Endotoxins, increasing speed of spread, a capsule that shields it from basic white cell defense and it`s Fimbriae would increase its adherence to the edge of the cellbox, which is a lining of cells, making it harder for white blood cells to discover and combat the bacterium. On the other hand one could release an unknown pathogen into the cellbox and try to fend it off, using different techniques, including the basic white T cell attack to flag it as a pathogen and have it analyze it after it is consumed by it. When the cell flows out of the bloodstream on the screen it may give a popup giving some valuable information on some specifics of the pathogen, giving away that it has a capsule, or an endotoxin on which the player can try out different defensive cells (neutrophils, macrophages, eosinophils, etc). Some may try to eat up the bacteria while others will try destroying it with anti-particles.
Everything could get cool names and one can unlock achievements to keep the game interesting to play for people of all levels of intelligence. Perhaps an option for scientific mode and Casual mode can be enabled where white blood cells would be called soldier cells, a Neutrophil would be called a Neutralizer and Macrophage would be called a sweeper.
Basic game setup campaign and Versus:
A player would start the screen with a box of cells around the edge of the screen, like three layers thick. On the right hand side a one cell layer thick line would create an area of bloodstream and the rest of the should feel like it is filled with an invisible fluids. This area is the battle zone where the actual combat happens.
The blood will supply the fluid with floating Resource, being: Proteins (for growth) in the form of proteins
Energy (to stay alive) in the form of Sugars and oxygen as fuel DNA/RNA (for replication) in the form of amino acids


A player could create a pathogen and release it with a button into the stream and see how well it does going through the blood vessel layer, hunt for food and stay alive versus the immune cells that constantly pass by in the blood stream too. The goal for the pathogen is to replicate up to 100 of the pathogen, in which it can spread beyond the infected area and the game is won for the pathogen, or eradicate the pathogen and the game is won by the immune system. Once a player reaches victory on a certain pattern an achievement will be unlocked with the name of the pathogen, a cool subtitle (‘a wolf in sheeps cloths’ could be one, for herpes virus, a pathogen that relies on hiding within host cells) and from this point on, the player can release this pathogen in every next campaign or versus mode. Scores can be made by amount of replications (DNA score), amount of total energy produced, or amount of proteins used, or time it takes to replicate up to 100.
List of Virulence factors or “Tools” (weapons and shields if u will) a pathogen could use.
Size, cell wall, membrane (simply structural), peptidoglycans (allow for better solving in fluids and spread), lipopolysaccharides (also called endotoxins which destroy cells to harvest its resources if u will), techoic acids (or just acids do the same as endotoxins but better and fend off immune cells), DNA (allows for stealing of host dna soure), RNA (allows for fast replication inside cells), Porins (allow for easy uptake of resources and enhance endurance of a cell), Capsule (extra defensive layer), envelop (extra defensive layer and a cloaking devise versus nonspecific immune cells, flagella (for motility of the cell), fimbriae (for solid adherence to other cells), spores (for spread and undetectable hibernation states), nucleus (not for bacteria, but small parasites, make it harder to kill the cell with toxins), ribosomes (for the production of resource and creation of toxins by the pathogen), nucleocapsids (core shield), lysosomes (for the destruction of antiparticles that try to destroy the pathogen), mitochondria (energy source) and many more.
One could create These kinds of pathogens, all with different mechanisms of attack, defense and replication methods.
prion, Virus, Bacteria, fungi, helminths (worms)

Summary: The game would have elements of an agility game, a game with achievements and unlockable parts to keep people playing and feel like having progress, while still having a good deal of an informative factor. There are many ways one could go on this concept as the game would be developed, turned into a more combat game, more a research and invent type of game or even more informative and educational.

Example of building a bacterium in Cellbox:

Step 1: a. Chose a DNA or RNA strain. B. take base structural component. C. add defensive, offensive or utility components (outer membrane, flagella, hyphae).

Step 2: click start on the bottom right and see how this particular specimen does vs. a blank, a specific immune system. You would move the pathogens around in the cellbox, trying to get them fed on proteins, dna and sugars so they can replicate, while avoiding white blood cells as much as possible. U could use the tricks you added on it. The hyphae make u stick to a cellwall and give you an advantage if a weak white cell tries to consume u, the flagella burns energy, but gives you good speed to move around and the extra layer protects you from harder environments and allows you to infiltrate the cell layers if you have to dodge a white cell for a while.

If you manage to stay alive and replicate yourself, you will unlock The Neisseria Germ, for later use in your versus and campaign game, having this exact layout. This way people can learn about all the different pathogens while combatting in a fun and perhaps competitive game. It would ask of people to be creative, unlock new components through the campaign and still call on their agility and skill on actually surviving the matches.

Example of Developing a proper defensive immune response:
Step 1: guide a sensory cell to the specific pathogen and guide it into the bloodstream towards the development center (Lymph nodes).

Step 2: guide the innate immune systems response cells to the sight and chase down as many pathogens as possible, to contain their spread.

Step 3: use the intelligence from the sensory cell to deploy the proper kind of defensive cells. These may be cytotoxic T cells to chase them down, macrophage cells that can chase down germs into the tissue, cells that deploy antibodies for a big chemical sweep and even helper T cells that are fast moving and can call upon the killer cells to rush to them and quickly contain an area where a lot of replication is going on.
Step 4: Keep an eye on the available resources that the blood carries to the cellbox. You can play around with the amount of resources that the blood supplies, effectively slowing down spread but also your own development. This can be useful for containment, but if the germs have spores, harder shells or can hide in tissue or even inside host cells you might make things worse for yourself.

One can see the bloodstream area on the right, the combat area in the middle, the cel layers around the area. the red cells carry oxygen bubles that I didn’t draw in yet. The small particles are sugar molecules used for fuel, the little white cells can be dragged in as shown above by the immune player to help chase the germs, shown top right (one could tap the cell and chase down a germ) the germ player could use taps and drags to control his germs too, for instance tap and hold would make the germ on the left move around, tap once and the options appear on it as shown, then it can get a boost because of its flagella, hardened so it takes longer to consume because its outer membrane, attach to the tissue with a chance to infiltrate too because of the fimbrae and if it gathered enough (one or two DNA molecules) it can duplicate and split into two. Ofcourse one would need an interface somewhere, buttons as well and some meters showing resources, etc. But this is how I had it in mind.
PS the art is all very basic and not representative of how it necessarily has to look. But somewhat in this fashion would be nice.
